Hi, I'm Paul Marcos,
Application Services Evangelist at Apple.
When you write iOS and
Mac OS X applications,
you do so using the
Objective-C programming language.
I love using Objective-C.
It's a simple,
elegant language that's easy to use,
and you can write great
applications with it.
And we've made it even better by
adding a really cool new technology
called Automatic Reference Counting.
Historically,
Objective-C has used a manual
reference counting mechanism for
managing the lifetime of objects.
Unlike an automatic
garbage collection system,
you have to be careful to avoid
mistakes that can lead to memory
leaks or application crashes.
Unfortunately, these are common problems,
especially for programmers
new to Objective-C.
Thankfully, Automatic Reference Counting,
or ARC, eliminates the manual and
error-prone steps involved in
managing reference-counted objects,
freeing you to focus on the design
of your object relationships and the
functionality of your application.
Whether you're new to
Objective-C or a veteran coder,
there's plenty to learn about
this powerful new technology
and how it will lead to simpler,
more robust,
and more easily maintained code.
Let me show you how this is going
to make your life so much better.
So what exactly is ARC?
Automatic Reference Counting implements
automatic memory management for
Objective-C objects and blocks,
freeing the programmer from the need to
explicitly insert retains and releases.
That's the textbook style answer, which,
as most textbooks are, is pretty dry.
It's actually a lot more
interesting than that.
So let's see what makes ARC so great.
On iOS, you're responsible for
managing the memory yourself.
But it's hard.
There's a lot of details and
you've got to get them all right.
It's really easy to make a mistake
and then your app crashes or leaks.
So are there any alternatives?
How about Garbage Collection?
Garbage Collection does all that
stuff for you automatically and
all the complexity just goes away.
So it's pretty obvious that Garbage
Collection is the better way,
right?
Well, let's put these side by side
and see how they compare.
Developing in a manual memory
management environment can be a pain.
Garbage collection manages memory
for you and makes it a lot easier.
On the manual side,
you have to write a lot of
code that really doesn't add
any functionality to your app.
With GC, you don't have to do that,
so you can focus on writing code
that actually does something useful.
And you just need to make a
single mistake in the manual
world and your app crashes.
You typically don't have that problem
in a garbage collected environment.
So it's pretty clear that
garbage collection wins over
manual memory management,
right?
Well, it's not that easy.
GC also has some downsides.
First, with GC, garbage can build up,
as it might take a while for the
collector to kick in and clean things up.
That's not good,
especially if you don't have
that much memory available,
like on a mobile device.
That's where Manual Reference
Counting clearly performs better.
As objects are freed,
the memory used is immediately available.
Second, GC is non-deterministic.
You typically don't have control
over when the collector kicks in.
You don't really know what
state your app might be in,
nor how long it will take
before you're back in control.
With manual management,
you are in control and the
behavior is predictable.
Back on the GC side,
because you're not in control,
it's possible that collection will
be done at a crucial point in time,
like when the user is scrolling
through a list or zooming a photo.
This can lead to visible
UI interruptions.
With manual management,
it's easy to set the priorities
right and deliver smooth performance.
These are just some of the reasons
that GC is not available in iOS.
We feel that smooth performance
and a stutter-free user experience
are what matters to our users.
Regardless, out of these two options,
neither one is a slam dunk winner.
What we really want is
something that looks like this.
It's the best of both worlds.
Automatic memory management
without the performance drawbacks.
And that's exactly what we did with ARC.
It's still memory management
based on reference counting,
just like it used to be when
you had to do it manually.
It's just done automatically for you.
So if you don't have to do it,
who does it?
We taught our LLVM compiler to
do the memory management for you.
It magically inserts all the
necessary bookkeeping calls for
you in exactly the right places.
This automatic bookkeeping
is done at compile time,
which means there's no
thread or process at runtime,
so no impact on performance.
To better understand how this all works,
let's look at the following four things.
First, we'll look at what impact this
has on how you write your code.
Then I'll show you how you can
migrate an existing project to ARC.
Next, we'll go through some tips
and tricks for using ARC.
And we'll end with a couple
notes about performance.
Let's dive in.
There's an old adage that
goes something like this:
"The best line of code is the
line you never had to write."
That sums up what writing code
with ARC is really all about.
If you already know Objective-C,
it's not so much about
learning how to write ARC code.
It's about not writing the
code in the first place.
It's really all about writing less code.
Because the compiler does
all this work for you now,
there's simply less
code for you to write.
Let's take a look at three
key areas where ARC impacts
how you write your code.
The first is about our old friends,
retain, release, and auto-release.
So what's the big change with retain,
release, and auto-release?
Well, it's very simple.
They just go away.
You never have to write them again.
So what happens to your code?
Under Manual Memory Management,
if you allocate an object,
then you own it,
and it's your responsibility
to release it.
But under ARC, you still allocate it,
and you still own the object,
but the compiler keeps track of
things and releases it for you
as soon as you're done with it.
So with ARC, the release just goes away.
If you're already familiar
with Objective-C and how
reference counting works,
this just feels really weird.
That code just looks wrong.
But with ARC, it's really not.
You just have to forget about
the need to call release.
Of course,
you can still use the convenience
class methods to create your objects.
In this example with a local variable,
nothing changes using ARC.
But what about using convenience
methods with instance variables?
Here's part of a simple
stack implementation.
If you did this under
manual reference counting,
you'd be in for a rude surprise
because your app would end up crashing.
The problem is the array
created here is auto-released,
and because it's not been retained,
it will be deallocated after
the init method is done.
Any subsequent uses of that
instance variable will likely crash.
There's a couple ways
you could address this.
First,
you could alloc and init the array.
Now you own the array,
and it won't be deallocated.
Well, now your app won't crash anymore,
but you've traded a crash for a leak,
because the array is
never being released.
So this is no good either.
Now you would need to balance out
the retain with a release in dealloc.
Great.
Now you're good under
Manual Reference Counting.
And that's perhaps the simplest example,
but it's illustrative of how
easy it is to slip up and
forget to add that release,
or to use an object that has
already been deallocated.
With ARC, the compiler has got your back
and remembers all of this for you.
It'll keep track of your
instance variables automatically,
so you don't have to
write the release in DL.
Under ARC, we can just take that out.
In fact, you don't even need to write the
super DLK anymore because the
compiler will always automatically
invoke your superclass's
DLK method if you implement one.
So this is totally fine under ARC.
Again, this looks really wrong if you're
familiar with manual memory management,
but it's actually correct with ARC.
And you can even just use the
convenience methods in this case.
Under manual reference counting,
this would crash, but with ARC,
the compiler does the right thing.
Let's consider another aspect of this
stack class to see a different example.
This pop method removes the last
object from the stack and returns it.
That's pretty simple, right?
Well, under manual reference counting,
this method would likely not
work and may actually crash.
Why?
Imagine if that last object you
wanted to return was only being
retained by the array itself.
The act of removing it from the array
would decrement the retain count and
the object would then be deallocated.
So this code could very well
return a deallocated object,
and your caller won't
be happy about that.
So you might simply add a call to
retain the object so that it's not
deallocated anymore before you return it.
But now you're returning
a retained object.
This would be a leak and violates the
naming conventions used in Objective-C.
So you would need to auto-release
it when you return the object.
Now you're good under
Manual Reference Counting.
But with ARC, you don't have to remember
this whole dance at all.
The compiler does all
this bookkeeping for you,
and these pitfalls just go away.
This actually takes us back to where we
started with that simple implementation.
And that's what you'd write using ARC.
You write code in a way
that just feels natural.
Let's look at the object graph to better
understand what's going on with ARC.
Somewhere in your code,
you have a reference to the stack.
And the stack has a
reference to the array.
And the array holds
references to some objects.
These are strong references.
The first thing happening in the
pop method is you create a reference
to the last object in the array.
The compiler will make sure that this
reference is actually a strong reference.
And as you can see,
when you remove the last
object from the array,
it'll remove the strong reference
the array had to the object.
But since the compiler created
a strong reference from X,
the object doesn't go away.
But what happens when this
code returns X to the caller?
Well, the compiler is smart enough to
understand that you want to pass
this reference back to whatever
code is accepting the return.
So it makes sure even
when X goes out of scope,
the reference is passed
over to the caller and will
continue tracking it there.
Once the object is
ultimately no longer needed,
then it will be released automatically.
So ARC does some wonderful things
with managing Objective-C objects.
But let's change gears slightly
and talk about blocks for a minute.
In order to manage blocks
correctly in the manual world,
you sometimes have to copy them
since they're created on the stack.
For example,
if you wanted to return a block,
you would have to copy it first,
which would move it from
the stack to the heap,
and then you would have to
auto-release the copied block so that
it would be cleaned up correctly.
Thankfully, under ARC,
blocks just work right.
You don't even have to copy
them before you return them.
The management all happens automatically.
So the impact of ARC on how
you write code is that you
just write what feels natural.
You don't have to call retain, release,
or auto-release anymore.
In fact, you're not allowed to.
With ARC enabled,
these will generate compile errors.
You don't need to implement
D-ALEC anymore either in order to
clean up your object references.
However, if you have malloced memory,
things like file descriptors
or non-objective C objects,
you would still need to
do that cleanup in D-ALEC.
You can choose to use alloc init or
convenience methods to create objects.
It doesn't matter which one you use.
Block references work automatically.
And finally,
ARC lets you really focus on what
your object graph should look like,
not in policing the
existence of those objects.
So think about relationships
between your objects and not
about their reference counts.
Okay, the second thing I want to
cover is another old friend,
NS Auto Release Pool.
With ARC, the number of times you have to
explicitly use an auto-release
pool has been reduced greatly.
ARC generally doesn't require you to
deal with auto-release pools anymore,
unless perhaps you're dealing
with a framework generating
lots of auto-released objects.
In this case,
you might want to use one in order
to keep a lid on memory usage.
The change here is that we're pulling
it directly into the language with a
direct syntax for defining a block of
code wrapped with an auto-release pool.
This is much easier, much more natural,
and a lot faster than using
the NS Auto-Release Pool class.
Let's take a look at an example.
Here we have a while loop with an
auto-release pool around it which
will periodically get drained.
With ARC, the need to aggressively drain
auto-release pools is greatly reduced.
The compiler and the runtime
will work together to make the
management much more efficient.
In fact, in a lot of cases,
retained and auto-released objects
don't even end up in the pool at all.
However, if you do need to wrap code with
an auto-release pool explicitly,
you can do so with this simple syntax,
and that lets the compiler
understand what's going on.
The third big change is about
managing your object graph.
Specifically,
about the issue of retain cycles.
ARC will also help solve this problem.
Let's use an example of
a hierarchy of objects.
At the top, we have a collection object,
which might have a parent node,
and that parent node has a child node.
For convenience,
our child node wants to have a
reference back to its parent.
If this were implemented
with retained references,
this would create a circular reference
between the parent and the child.
So what's the problem with that?
Well, if the parent is removed
from the collection,
its retain count would drop,
and it would normally go away.
But it doesn't because the child still
has a strong reference to the parent.
So both objects would be leaked.
Since they're mutually
referring to each other,
neither retain count will drop to
zero and they'll never go away.
In this simple example, you might say,
well, that's not a big deal since
it's just two objects.
But usually objects will have
references to other objects.
And now this whole tree of
objects is being leaked.
So a common solution to this problem is
to change the reference from the child
to the parent to be a weak reference.
This works fine,
but introduces the burden of making sure
that that weak reference gets cleared
out correctly and doesn't end up as a
dangling pointer to a deallocated object.
While ARC doesn't directly
solve the retain cycle problem,
it introduces a new feature that does.
It's called zeroing weak references.
Zeroing weak references are
similar to assigned properties.
They do not increase the retain
count of the object they point to,
which means they do not
form a retain cycle.
Additionally,
zeroing weak references are safer
than using assigned properties because
they automatically get set to nil if
the pointed to object is deallocated.
This prevents the reference from
turning into a dangling pointer.
When combined with the automatic
management provided by ARC,
zeroing weak pointers will help you
manage your retain cycles efficiently.
So how do you use these
zeroing weak references?
Two new property attributes
have been introduced with ARC.
First,
the retain attribute changes to strong.
Functionally, nothing changes here.
Strong properties work exactly
like retain properties used to.
Next, assign becomes weak.
Weak properties are these
new zeroing weak references.
Let's look at perhaps the most
stereotypical example where we can
benefit from zeroing weak references.
Delegates are an established
pattern of a reference to an
object that's not retained.
These are commonly specified
as properties using a sign,
meaning that they don't get retained.
If you've ever had to debug a
crashing bug that turned out to
be a stale delegate reference,
then this change is for you.
Now just set your
delegate property to weak,
and when your delegate gets deallocated,
your reference will be
cleared out automatically.
Let's summarize what changes
when you write code using ARC.
First, retain, release,
and auto-release go away.
You can purge them from your memory.
NS-AutoReleasePool
becomes @AutoReleasePool,
with direct support in
the language syntax.
Retain properties become strong,
and assign properties become weak.
Next up,
let's look at how you can migrate
your existing projects to ARC.
ARC is available in iOS 5 and in Lion.
But we want you to use ARC in
your projects starting today,
which is why we made it work back
in iOS 4 and Snow Leopard as well.
However, zeroing weak references are
only available in iOS 5.
Keep in mind that ARC is really just
automating retain and release for you.
Therefore,
it's completely compatible with
existing retain release code.
And you can opt in or opt out
of ARC on a file by file basis
by using these compiler flags.
But you really should
switch to using ARC today.
For new projects,
starting with Xcode 4.2,
ARC is now enabled by default.
You can certainly enable ARC in
existing projects as well.
For that, you need to make sure
you're using the Xcode 4.2.
You can also make sure you're using
the LLVM3 compiler and that you set
the Objective-C automatic reference
counting build setting to Yes.
And then you just need to go
through all your code and make all
those changes that we talked about.
Or you can use the ARC migration tool.
It's supported in an Xcode 4.2.
You can find it in Xcode's
Edit menu under Refactor
Convert to Objective-C ARC.
And it applies the changes
for you to your code.
It'll remove all the calls to retain,
release, and auto-release.
It'll replace NSAutoReleasePool with
the new @AutoReleasePool syntax.
And it changes assigned
properties to weak,
switching them to
zeroing weak references.
The ARC migration tool
works in three stages.
First, you select the target to convert,
and it will check to make sure your
code is using existing best practices.
If it finds places where you
aren't adhering to conventions,
or if it finds really tricky cases that
the tool can't convert automatically,
it calls them to your attention.
The next step is to apply
the changes to your code.
But don't worry, it won't apply any of
the changes just yet.
The last step is to present
the diffs to you for review.
You can see exactly what
changed and choose which files
you want to have converted.
For those of you who are
still supporting iOS 4,
zeroing weak references aren't available,
so the migration tool will not
change assigned properties to weak.
Instead, it will change them to
unsafe underbar unretained.
Which gives you the same unsafe
behavior that a sign did,
so beware of dangling pointers.
Now let's take a look at some tips
and tricks for situations you might
run into when writing ARC code.
First up are singletons.
Some developers implement
singletons by writing their
own retain and release methods.
Under ARC,
you can't call or even implement
retain and release anymore.
Instead, you could use a shared instance
pattern and make sure your singleton
objects are only initialized once.
You can have a class method that hands
out a shared instance of this object.
This shared instance is
stored in a static variable,
and if it hasn't been created yet,
it'll get created.
If you want to make this thread safe,
you could also use DispatchOnce.
DispatchOnce will make sure the block
you pass to it executes only once.
Or another way to achieve a similar
effect is to simply use the fact
that classes are singletons.
For example, let's say you have multiple
network requests going on and want
to display the network activity
indicator as long as at least one
of these requests is still alive.
A simple static counter
might be all you need.
Ownership qualifiers allow you to tell
the compiler how it should do memory
management for Objective-C types.
Underbar underbar strong is the
default and will keep an object alive.
Underbar underbar weak will keep a safe
reference as long as the object exists.
Here's a fun example
to see ARC in action.
If you were to declare a local
variable as weak and then never
assign the object it points at to
something with a strong reference,
it can go away immediately
after it's created.
So in this example,
it will actually print
null for the string because
S was only a weak reference,
so the object got released and
S automatically got set to nil.
There's also __unsafe_unretained,
which will be a traditional
unsafe pointer reference that
is not automatically zeroed out.
And lastly, there's __autoreleasing,
which can be used when
passing objects by reference.
Blocks can present some
difficulties with retain cycles.
For example,
in Manual Reference Counting,
this code has the effect
of not retaining X.
In ARC, this defaults to retaining X,
just like all other objects
because strong is the default.
To get the manual reference
counting behavior under ARC,
you could use the unsafe unretained,
but as the name implies,
having a non-retained variable is
dangerous and is therefore discouraged.
Two better options would be either to
use underbar underbar weak if you don't
need to support iOS 4 or Snow Leopard,
or to set the block value to nil
in order to break the retain cycle.
Here's an advanced tip that
might not apply to you,
but if it does, it's an important one.
This can be pretty confusing,
but hang in there and
you'll get the gist of it.
ARC automates the management of
Objective-C objects and blocks.
If you're using core foundation
and rely on the toll-free bridging
between Objective-C and CF,
then you have to give the compiler
a hand so that it knows what to do.
The first case is simply to do a
cast without implying any change in
ownership between CF and Objective-C.
To do this, you use the underbar
underbar bridge keyword.
This will just do a straight
pointer cast and nothing changes
with the management of that memory.
However,
there are times where you want to move
an object from CF to Objective-C and
then use Objective-C conventions
for managing the object's lifetime.
For example,
let's say you have an object in
CF that was created with one of
the various CF create functions.
Ordinarily,
you might just cast this to an
Objective-C object and then later
call release or auto-release on it.
But with ARC,
you can't call release or auto-release,
so you're kind of stuck.
To satisfy the obligation,
you can use the CF bridging
release function,
which will fulfill your duty on
the CF side and release the object.
And then at that point,
ARC will take over the
ownership of that object.
Conversely, you might want to take an
Objective-C object that's being managed
by ARC and cast it over to a CF object,
that object managed under
CF memory management rules.
To do this,
you would use the corresponding
CFBridgingRetain function,
which will increment the retain
count of the object by one and
remove it from being managed by ARC.
At this point,
the returned CF object will
need to have CFRelease called
on it in order to satisfy the
memory management obligations.
The takeaway point here is
if you're moving objects
between CF and Objective C,
you have to make sure you abide
by the rules on the CF side when
moving objects back and forth.
Our next tip has to do
with switch statements.
Technically,
C allows you to define a variable under
a case label in a switch statement.
This makes it hard for the compiler to
reason about what your code is doing and
when the object needs to be released.
LLVM under ARC will make
you aware of this problem.
A simple solution is to help the
compiler out by wrapping the body of
a case statement with curly braces.
This makes it clear what the expected
scope of the local variable is.
Under ARC, you also can't put object
references in C structures.
Instead of using a
simple C structure here,
consider a full-fledged
Objective-C object.
If you end up mixing and
matching ARC and non-ARC code,
you need to be careful with method names.
ARC expects the usual Cocoa naming
conventions to be followed.
This is especially important for methods
that transfer ownership of objects.
For example,
if this serial method were compiled with
ARC and then called by non-ARC code,
the compiler will return
an auto-released object.
And this new serial method would
return a retained object because
the method name begins with "new."
This is also why you can't have
properties that begin with "new."
The important point here is that if
you're mixing and matching worlds,
you need to be careful and
play by the rules of the
conventions on the non-ARC side,
because that's what the compiler
will do on the ARC side.
Lastly, let's talk a little
bit about performance.
We've put a lot of effort into
making ARC as efficient as possible,
and we've tuned up the
Objective-C runtime for ARC.
First, the retain-release implementation
on NSObject now only takes 40% of
the CPU cycles as it did before,
which is a major speed-up.
Secondly, the new at-autorelease-pool
syntax is much faster than the
old NSAutorelease-pool class.
It's not actually allocating
an object anymore,
and it now only takes about
20% of the CPU cycles than it
did with NSAutorelease-pool.
Third, it's common practice in
Cocoa to return auto-released
objects from getter methods.
This frequently means the returned object
stays around longer than it's needed,
until the current
auto-release-pool goes away.
Since the compiler and runtime
were co-designed for ARC,
this enables a number of
really amazing optimizations.
The runtime and compiler know
when you are in an ARC method,
returning an object back to ARC code.
In this case,
the runtime avoids putting that object
in the auto-release-pool at all.
So this is a nice performance win.
The cost of doing these auto-released
getters when the optimization
kicks in is now only 5% of the
CPU cycles that it used to be.
And additionally,
all these objects are managed by ARC,
so they go away as soon as
they're no longer needed,
which also reduces the high watermark
for memory usage in your apps.
Well, that's a whole lot of
information about ARC.
To recap, now you know what ARC is,
how it makes your apps much
more stable by reducing leaks
and eliminating crashes.
You've seen how writing ARC code
means writing less code,
leaving you with more natural
and more maintainable code.
You've seen how you can migrate your
apps to ARC with the ARC Migration Tool.
And we've talked about
a few tips and tricks,
and have seen some data about ARC's
amazing performance improvements.
Automatic reference counting
is one of the most exciting
things to happen in Objective-C,
and I hope you embrace it starting today.
By doing so,
you'll be well along the path
towards more robust code that
doesn't leak and crashes a lot less.
If you're already familiar
with manual reference counting,
it might feel a little funny at first,
but you'll quickly shed the burdens
of having to worry about retain,
release, and auto-release.
If you're just starting
off with Objective-C,
then definitely stick with
ARC and you'll be in great shape.
Either way,
I'm positive you'll be very happy
with the results ARC will give you.